########################################
Scholars' Definitions of Primary Sources
########################################

The following quotations from scholars and academic institutions were
selected by historian Justin Lyles to aid users in understanding the
concept of primary sources:*


**Scholars' Definitions of Primary Sources**

*The following quotations from scholars and academic institutions were
selected by historian Justin Lyles to aid users in understanding the
concept of primary sources:*

"A primary source is firsthand testimony or direct evidence concerning a
topic under investigation. The nature and value of a source cannot be
determined without reference to the topic and questions it is meant to
answer. The same document, or other piece of evidence, may be a primary
source in one investigation and secondary in another. The search for
primary sources does not, therefore, automatically include or exclude
any category of records or documents.

-- `<www.library.yale.edu>`_

"By a 'source' the historian means material that is contemporary to the
events being examined. Such sources include, among other things,
diaries, letters, newspapers, magazine articles, tape recordings,
pictures, and maps. Such material may have appeared in print before,
edited or unedited, and still be a source. The term is meant to be
restrictive rather than inclusive, in that it attempts to indicate that
works of secondary scholarship, or synthesis, are not sources, since the
data have been distilled by another person. ... One good way for the
novice historian to lose Brownie points among his serious-minded fellows
is to call a biography of George Washington or an analysis of the Magna
Charta a 'source'."

-- Robin Winks, *The historian as detective; essays on evidence* (New
York: Harper & Row, 1969), p.xx.

"A primary source gives the words of the witnesses or the first
recorders of an event. Primary sources include manuscripts, archives,
letters, diaries, and speeches. ... Secondary sources are 'descriptions
of the event derived from and based on primary sources'. The line
between primary and secondary sources is often indistinct, for example,
a single document may be a primary source on some matter and a secondary
source on others."

-- Helen J. Poulton, *The historian's handbook* (Norman, OK: University
of Oklahoma Press, 1972), p.175-76.

"A primary source is distinguished from a secondary by the fact that the
former gives the words of the witnesses or first recorders of an event -- for 
example, the diaries of Count Ciano written under Mussolini's
regime. The researcher, using a number of such primary sources, produces
a secondary source."

-- Jacques Barzun, *The modern researcher*. Fifth edition (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1992), p.114 note.

"Primary sources are manuscripts, first-person diaries, oral histories,
letters, interviews, photographs, maps, films, sound recordings, music,
song sheets--fragments of history, incomplete in themselves, but when
assembled, analyzed, and researched, they can provide personal insights,
human drama, and deep historical understandings. Primary sources can
also be places and people. They are resources that speak directly to the
viewer, the reader, and the listener without explanatory context. They
evoke a sense of time and place. They often carry a point of view and
thus, by definition, are not always neutral or objective. This means
that one primary source can contradict another--or corroborate another.
Educators must understand how to work with these ambiguities and help
students construct the context for deeper understandings. This can be
done even with very young children."

-- Susan H. Veccia, *Uncovering our history: teaching with primary
sources*. (Chicago: American Library Association, 2004), p. 3.

**Return to:**

- :doc:`Primary Source </fields/primary-source>`
- :doc:`Quick-Start Metadata Guide </guides/quick-start-guide>`
- `Metadata Home <https://library.unt.edu/metadata/>`_